[Sedif]  WIP: New binding to allow to get water consumption from Sedif / Veolia web site (#18718)
openhab/openhab-addons: bundles/org.openhab.binding.sedif/README.md

To retrieve data, you need a `gateway` bridge linked to your Sedif Web account.

You will need to create an account prior to configuring your bridge.  
Go to the login page and click on the "Je crée mon espace" button:  
https://connexion.leaudiledefrance.fr/s/login/

After this, add your bridge and fill in your username and password.

| Parameter      | Description                                |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------|
| username       | Your Sedif platform username.              |
| password       | Your Sedif platform password.              |

```java
Bridge sedif:gateway:local "Gateway" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]
```

### Water Meter Discovery

After creating the bridge, the binding will populate the inbox with meters registered in your Sedif account.

### Meter Thing Configuration

To create a meter thing, you will need your contractId.
You can find it on the Sedif website, under the section "Tous mes contrats".
You will see a list where the first column labeled "Contrat" is the contractId.

If you have multiple meters on the same contract, you will also need to get your(s) meterId.

> MeterId is displayed at the contract details pages. 

Author: fixed

Note that you do not need to create the meter manually.
Once you create the gateway, the inbox will be populated automatically with all meter's that are registered on your account.

| Name            | Type    | Description                                             | Default | Required | Advanced |
|-----------------|---------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|----------|
| contractId      | text    | The identifier of your contract                         | N/A     | yes      | no       |
| meterId         | text    | The identifier of the meter associated  with this thing | N/A     | no       | no       |

```java
Thing sedif:meter:meter1 "Sedif Meter 1" (sedif:gateway:local)
	[  
		contractId="907....", meterId="D08MA......"
	]  
``

### Meter Thing Channels

| Channel                                     | Type         | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| base#mean-water-price                       | numeric      | R          | The water mean price                     |

> The daily group will give consumtion information with day granularity

Reviewer: Please check, this spelling mistake is done at many places.

        smartFormatter: true
  xAxis:
    - component: oh-time-axis
      config:
        gridIndex: 0
  yAxis:
    - component: oh-value-axis
      config:
        gridIndex: 0
```

### Historic Data Retrieval

The first time you launch this binding, it will send multiple requests to the Sedif website to retrieve historical data.
This is done in 3-month chunks, from the end to the beginning of the contract.

Be aware that this process can take some time (around 2–3 minutes for 10 years of data).

This data is then cached in userdata/sedif/sedif.json.
On subsequent runs, the binding only retrieves the most recent data and refreshes daily.

If something goes wrong, you can delete the sedif.json file to start fresh.

### Multiple Contracts

You may have multiple contracts on your Sedif account:

Multiple properties with different meters:
If this is the case, simply create one Sedif thing for each separate contract.

Contract change on the same meter:
Sometimes, you might have two contracts for the same meter. In this scenario, create only one Sedif thing and follow these steps:

Set the contractId to the older contract and let the binding retrieve the full historical data.

> Then, update the contractId to the new contract and restart OpenHAB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, update the contractId to the new contract and restart openHAB.
```

# Sedif Binding

This binding enables you to retrieve water consumption data for consumers in the Île-de-France region of France.

It is based on the new Sedif - Eau Ile de France website : https://www.sedif.com/.

![SedifWebSite](doc/sedifWebSite.png)

## Supported Things

The binding supports two different types of things: the `sedif-web` bridge and the `sedif` meter.

- `sedif-web`: This bridge acts as the gateway between your Sedif account and the Sedif meter thing.

> - `sedif`: A Sedif thing that represents your water meter and exposes your water consumption.

Reviewer 2: `gateway` looks not so bad.

> - `sedif`: A Sedif thing that represents your water meter and exposes your water consumption.

Author: Yes, gateway seems ok to me.

### Sedif Web Bridge Configuration

> To retrieve data, the Sedif device needs to be linked to a `sedif-web` bridge.

Author: fix in next commit

You will need to create an account prior to configuring your bridge.  
Go to the login page and click on the "Je crée mon espace" button:  
https://connexion.leaudiledefrance.fr/s/login/

After this, add your bridge and fill in your username and password.

      | Parameter      | Description                                |
      |----------------|--------------------------------------------|
      | username       | Your Sedif platform username.              |
      | password       | Your Sedif platform password.              |

    ```java
    Bridge sedif:sedif-web:local "SedifWebBridge" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]
    ```

### Water Meter Discovery

After creating the bridge, the binding will populate the inbox with meters registered in your Sedif account.

![Discovery](doc/WaterMeterDiscovery.png)

### Sedif Thing Configuration

> To create a Sedif thing, you will need your contractId.

Author: fix on next commit.
The metterId is displayed on the contract details page.

Also add a note that there is an automatic discovery that will populate the Inbox automatically with all registered meter on the account.

You can find it on the Sedif website, under the section "Tous mes contrats".
You will see a list where the first column labeled "Contrat" is the contractId.

| Name            | Type    | Description                                           | Default | Required | Advanced |
|-----------------|---------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|----------|
| contractId      | text    | The identifier of your contract                       | N/A     | yes      | no       |
| meterId         | text    | The identifier of the meter associate with this thing | N/A     | no       | no       |

```java
Thing sedif:sedif:sedifmeter1 "Sedif Meter 1" (sedif:sedif-web:local)
	[  
		contractId="9076051",
		meterId="D08MA010227"

> 	]  

Author: Fix in next commit.
Also removed portion of the meterId and contractId as it was my contract!

| monthly-consumption#consumption             | consumption  | R          | Timeseries for monthly water consumption |

- The yearly group will give consumtion information with year granularity

| Channel                                     | Type         | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| yearly-consumption#thisYear                 | consumption  | R          | The current year water consumption       |
| yearly-consumption#lastYear                 | consumption  | R          | The last year water consumption          |
| yearly-consumption#year-2                   | consumption  | R          | The year-2 water consumption             |
| yearly-consumption#consumption              | consumption  | R          | Timeseries for yearly water consumption  |

### Full Example

```java
Bridge sedif:sedif-web:local "SedifWebBridge" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]

Thing sedif:sedif:sedifmeter1 "Sedif Meter 1" (sedif:sedif-web:local)
	[  
		contractId="9076051",
		meterId="D08MA010227"
	]  
    {

>     }

Author: fix in next commit

> Number	ConsoDaily       "Daily Conso [%.0f %unit%]"      <energy> { channel="sedif:sedif:sedifmeter1:daily-consumption#consumption"   }

Author: done

> gatewagatewa# Sedif Binding

Author: fixed

This binding enables you to retrieve water consumption data for consumers in the Île-de-France region of France.

It is based on the new Sedif - Eau Ile de France website : https://www.sedif.com/.

> ![SedifWebSite](doc/sedifWebSite.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: i see no added value to this screenshot.

Author: Ok, i've removed it

## Supported Things

The binding supports two different types of things: the `gateway` bridge and the `meter`.

- `gateway`: This bridge acts as the gateway between your Sedif account and the meter thing.
- `meter`: A meter thing that represents your water meter and exposes your water consumption.

### Gateway Bridge Configuration

To retrieve data, you need a `gateway` bridge linked to your Sedif Web account.

You will need to create an account prior to configuring your bridge.  
Go to the login page and click on the "Je crée mon espace" button:  
https://connexion.leaudiledefrance.fr/s/login/

> 

Author: fixed

After this, add your bridge and fill in your username and password.

      | Parameter      | Description                                |
      |----------------|--------------------------------------------|
      | username       | Your Sedif platform username.              |
      | password       | Your Sedif platform password.              |

    ```java
    Bridge sedif:gateway:local "Gateway" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]

>     ```

Reviewer: Why indent?
```suggestion
| Parameter      | Description                                |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------|
| username       | Your Sedif platform username.              |
| password       | Your Sedif platform password.              |

```java
Bridge sedif:gateway:local "Gateway" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]
```
```

Author: No good reason, fixed

### Water Meter Discovery

After creating the bridge, the binding will populate the inbox with meters registered in your Sedif account.

![Discovery](doc/WaterMeterDiscovery.png)

### Meter Thing Configuration

To create a meter thing, you will need your contractId.
You can find it on the Sedif website, under the section "Tous mes contrats".
You will see a list where the first column labeled "Contrat" is the contractId.

> If you have multiple meter on the same contract, you will also need to get your(s) meterId.

Author: fixed

> MeterId are displayed in the contract details pages. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MeterId is displayed at the contract details pages. 
```

Author: fixed

> Just click on the contract number in the contract list, and you will have a detailled pages with a label Compteur n°D08MAxxxxxx.

Author: fixed

> Just click on the contract number in the contract list, and you will have a detailled pages with a label Compteur n°D08MAxxxxxx.

Reviewer: Forgot to commit? I still see the typo.

Note that you are not forced to create the meter manually.

> Once you create the gateway, generally the inbox will be populated automatically with all meter that are registered on you accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you create the gateway, the inbox will be populated automatically with all meter's that are registered on your account.
```

> 

Author: fixed

| Name            | Type    | Description                                           | Default | Required | Advanced |
|-----------------|---------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|----------|
| contractId      | text    | The identifier of your contract                       | N/A     | yes      | no       |

> | meterId         | text    | The identifier of the meter associate with this thing | N/A     | no       | no       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| meterId         | text    | The identifier of the meter associated with this thing | N/A     | no       | no       |
```

```java

> Thing sedif:meter:meter1 "Sedif Meter 1" (sedif:gateway:local)

Author: Don't understand this comment.
We change bridge definition from sedif:sedif-web to sedif:gateway after first review of @lolodomo.
Can you check, and explain if you see something wrong

	[  
		contractId="907....", meterId="D08MA......"
	]  
``

### Meter Thing Channels

| Channel                                     | Type         | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| base#mean-water-price                       | numeric      | R          | The water mean price                     |

> 

Author: fixed

> - The daily group will give consumtion information with day granularity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The daily group will give consumtion information with day granularity
```

Author: fixed

| Channel                                     | Item type      | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------|------------|------------------------------------------|

> | daily-consumption#yesterday                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The yeasterday water consumption         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| daily-consumption#yesterday                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The water consumption from yesterday        |
```

| daily-consumption#day-2                     | Number:Volume  | R          | The day-2 water consumption              |
| daily-consumption#day-3                     | Number:Volume  | R          | The day-3 water consumption              |
| daily-consumption#consumption               | Number:Volume  | R          | Timeseries for water consumption         |
 

> - The weekly group will give consumtion information with week granularity

Author: fixed

| Channel                                     | Item type      | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| weekly-consumption#thisWeek                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The current week water consumption       |
| weekly-consumption#lastWeek                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The last week water consumption          |
| weekly-consumption#week-2                   | Number:Volume  | R          | The week-2 water consumption             |
| weekly-consumption#consumption              | Number:Volume  | R          | Timeseries for weekly water consumption  |

> - The monthly group will give consumtion information with month granularity

Reviewer: Still there.

| Channel                                     | Item type      | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| monthly-consumption#thisMonth               | Number:Volume  | R          | The current month water consumption      |

> | monthly-consumption#lastMonth               | Number:Volume  | R          | The last month water consumption         |

Author: fixed

| monthly-consumption#month-2                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The month-2 water consumption            |
| monthly-consumption#consumption             | Number:Volume  | R          | Timeseries for monthly water consumption |

> - The yearly group will give consumtion information with year granularity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The yearly group will give consumtion information with year granularity
```

Reviewer: Still there.

| Channel                                     | Item type      | Read/Write | Description                              |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------|------------|------------------------------------------|
| yearly-consumption#thisYear                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The current year water consumption       |
| yearly-consumption#lastYear                 | Number:Volume  | R          | The last year water consumption          |
| yearly-consumption#year-2                   | Number:Volume  | R          | The year-2 water consumption             |
| yearly-consumption#consumption              | Number:Volume  | R          | Timeseries for yearly water consumption  |

### Full Example

```java
Bridge sedif:gateway:local "GatewayBridge" [username="testuser@test.fr", password="mypassword"]

Thing sedif:meter:meter1 "Meter 1" (sedif:gateway:local)
	[  
		contractId="907....", meterId="D08MA......"
	]  
    {
    }

> 

Reviewer: This declaration does not seem right.

Author: I don't understand this point.
Why do you remove the bridge definition from the Thing definition ?

If I use the Copy file definition from the UI on newly create meter, I've get the following result:
Thing sedif:meter:5ddd728c7c:7b7ae19c74 "Meter" (sedif:gateway:5ddd728c7c) [contractId="aa", meterId="aa"]

Can you try to explain me what I've make wrong, don't undestand is used for group, not bridge.
Where do it put the gateway reference if not there ?

Reviewer: I'm not fully right here, but you are.
I was not aware of this syntax to describing the bridge.  The `()` are used for item groups, it got me confused. 
If it is just on one line, it is fine.

Author: Yes, see you other comment on this also.
Finally I move it to your syntax

Note that you bind your series to one of the timeseries channels: ConsoDaily, ConsoWeekly, ConsoMonthly, or ConsoYearly.

```
config:
  label: Sedif Conso Weekly -x Histo
  order: "10000000"
  period: 4M
  sidebar: false
slots:
  dataZoom:
    - component: oh-chart-datazoom
      config:
        type: inside
  grid:
    - component: oh-chart-grid
      config:
        includeLabels: true
  legend:
    - component: oh-chart-legend
      config:
        bottom: 3
        type: scroll
  series:
    - component: oh-time-series
      config:
        gridIndex: 0
        item: ConsoWeekly
        label:
          formatter: =v=>Number.parseFloat(v.data[1]).toFixed(4)*1000 + " L"
          position: inside
          show: true
        name: Sedif Conso Weekly -x Histo
        noBoundary: true
        noItemState: true
        service: inmemory
        type: bar
        xAxisIndex: 0
        yAxisIndex: 0
  tooltip:
    - component: oh-chart-tooltip
      config:
        confine: true
        smartFormatter: true
  xAxis:
    - component: oh-time-axis
      config:
        gridIndex: 0
  yAxis:
    - component: oh-value-axis
      config:
        gridIndex: 0
```

> ### Historical Data Retrieve

Author: fixed

The first time you launch this binding, it will send multiple requests to the Sedif website to retrieve historical data.
This is done in 3-month chunks, from the end to the beginning of the contract.

Be aware that this process can take some time (around 2–3 minutes for 10 years of data).

This data is then cached in userdata/sedif/sedif.json.
On subsequent runs, the binding only retrieves the most recent data and refreshes daily.

If something goes wrong, you can delete the sedif.json file to start fresh.

> ### Multiple Contract

Author: fixed

> You may have multiple contracts on your Sedif account:

Reviewer: this might need a rewrite/restructure. If this is too hard as non-native speaker, use your favorite ai bot.

Author: done
